Another important topic that we need to discuss before getting deeper into our theme is internationalization
and localization.
So internationalization sometimes you'll see it is written as i18n.
And that's because there are 18 letters between the i and the n,
refers to the process of making your theme available for translation.
So in order for translators to be able to translate your theme we have to do some special things while
coding. Localization on the other hand refers to the process of actually translating the theme.
So in order to localize a theme it must be internationalized first.
So we will talk about localization at the end of this course.
But what's important to know now is how to internationalize your theme. And you should know that very
well early on because we will use internationalization functions in pretty much every file we create.
So let's visit our code now and see what you should do in order to make our theme translatable.
I'm having index.php open right now. And we're not responsible for anything that comes from the
database like the title and the content and so on.
We're only responsible for strings like the "Sorry, no posts match your criteria."
Imagine we want to translate this string.
The only way we can do that now is by actually editing the index.php file and replacing the string.
But that's not a good practice.
So what we can do is we can wrap the strings in some functions. And these functions will make sure that
the string will be translatable.
So before doing anything let's go to the browser. And let's go to an unexisting page so that we can get the "Sorry..."
string. This one. And now let's go back and let's open PHP tags before the string.
And let's pass our string as a first argument in a function called __().
Right?
And then the second argument is something called the text domain.
So remember in  style.css when we mentioned that we should add a field called "Text Domain"
and it should be unique.
So this is it.
And this is what we should pass as a second argument here. So WordPress will use this text domain in
order to distinguish between the translations for different themes and plugins.
So it should be unique to our theme. And we will also use it when we come to localization at the end
of this course.
But for now just make sure to pass the second argument every time you use one of these tranlation functions.
Also make sure not to pass it as a variable. It should always be a string. And same for the translation
string make sure not use
variables here like this or even by appending like this.
We'll see how to handle variables in strings
later in this lecture.
So what this __() function will do?
It will return the string
we pass as a first argument,
if your website is in English. Or if you have your website in another language it will return the translation
of the string from a translation file that we will learn how to generate later in this course.
So all you have to know now is just when you output any string in your theme
you must wrap it in a translation function. And we'll see other translation functions later in this lecture.
So let's have a refresh the browser and as you can see we have nothing.
And that's because this function does not echo.
It just returns the value. So you can use this function if you want to maybe assign the string to a
variable maybe. But if you need to echo your string you can just use echo and then use the __()
function.
So here we have it. Or WordPress also provides another function called _e().
And this will translate and echo your string. Great.
So let's now see some of the other functions that we can use for translation.
So I'm gonna open a PHP tag here to do some testing.
So assume we have a number of comments that will come from the database, so it will be dynamic.
But let's say it's currently 3. And then we want to display a string that will be "one comment",
if we have only single comment. Or if we have more than one comment we want to display the number of
comments and then the string "comments".
In other words we want to display either "one comment" or "3 comments".
All right?
And also at the same time we want to make the string translatable.
So how can we do that.
WordPress provides another function which is _n() and what you can do is you can pass the
singular version of your string.
So "One comment" and then the second argument is the plural version.
So let's write "comments" for now and then we'll see how to add the number. And the third argument is
the number and this number will decide which string will be used.
And of course the last argument is the text domain.
So let's see what we have in the browser.
And we have "comments" because we have three comments.
If we change this to 1, we now should have "One comment". Great. So how do we display the number before the comments?
And keep in mind that we mentioned that we cannot put variables in translated strings.
So in order to achieve that we can use a function called printf(). And printf(),
if you're familiar with PHP, will print a formatted string.
So let's say we would like to print a string which will say  "this post has " and then the number of
comments.
So what we can do is printf, we can out a placeholder which will start with a modular sign or a percentage
sign and then a character. And this character will signify the type of the placeholder.
So it's just gonna be a string.
We can put "s". If it's gonna be number we can put "d",
and so on.
So in our case we can use "s" because it's a string. And then let's put the rest of the sentence.
So "comments".
And then the second argument is the value that we want to replace the placeholder with.
So in our case it's $comments.
So let's take a look.
And as you can see we have "this post has 3 comments".
The %s placeholder is replaced with the actual number.
So how can we use printf() for this situation here.
We can add the placeholder here before the "comments". So let's remove the printf() and now the
_n() function will return "%s comments",
if the comments is larger than 1. So what's written from the _n() we'll put it as a first argument
in the printf() in order to replace the placeholder.
And the second argument will be the $comments again.
So this way if _n() returned "%s comments". The printf() replace the %s with
the actual number of comments.
So we just, we should not echo now because printf() already echoes. And we have "3 comments".
Let's try one.
And we should have "One comment".
So that's how we can use _n().
Let's now move on and highlight some other translation functions. We have _x() and this is when you
want to give some context to your string.
So let's say we have the word "Post" so this can be post as a noun and post as a verb.
So _x() can take a second argument where you can describe what you mean.
So in our case we can say "noun" and then the third argument will be the text domain. And the second argument,
it can be anything. You can describe your string in any ways.
We also have a version of _x() which is _ex() which will echo and translates at the
same time.
So now that we've seen some of the translation functions I think it's time to mention that we will not
use any of these functions.
Remember in the last lecture when I told you that any input that is coming from the user must be escaped
before it's outputted in our theme.
Right?
So these strings will be replaced with translations. And these translations are coming from users from
translators. And the translator can put maybe a SCRIPT tag as a translation for one of the strings.
So most of the time whenever we want to translate a string we will not use these functions. WordPress provides
other functions that will escape and translate at the same time like esc_html_e().
Some functions like _n() have no escaping equivalent like the _e().
So in this case we can use esc_html() and then call _n() and inside of it.
I'll leave you a link in this lecture for all the other translation functions.
But now let's move on to another situation
I would like to highlight. So let's say we have a variable called $city and this could be something dynamic
from the database.
And let's say it's currently "london".
And now we need to echo a translatable string which will say "Your city is ".
And then the variable $city, right?
And remember that we cannot use variables in the translation functions.
So what we can do is we can echo and then we can use,
remember we have to use now esc_html__().
And then as a first argument we can say "Your city is" and then space.
And of course our text domain.
And then we can just append the variable $city. Right?
So this will work.
Let's take a look.
However this is not how it should be done.
You are currently forcing the translator to just translate "Your city is " without the actual city being
in the context.
In other languages maybe the city will come in the middle or maybe at the beginning.
So in situations like this one always use printf().
So let's echo this string again
but now using printf(). So "printf" and then "esc_html__ " and then "Your
city is " and then a placeholder. And of course a second argument is the text domain.
And then finally the second argument for the printf() function will be the variable $city, right?
So this way it will also work.
Let's take a look.
But now we are allowing the translator to put the city name whereever he wants in the sentence, right?
So during the course we'll have a lot of situations like this one.
Another thing I want to point out is we can leave messages to the translator when we add placeholders
in our strings.
So if we add a PHP comment just before calling the translation functions the __(),
and then this comment starts with "/* translators" and then ":" and then after ":" and we can
write a message to the translator.
So for instance in our example we can say "%s is the city name" for example.
So it might be obvious here that the placeholder is a city name but in some situations you will have to leave
messages like this one. All right?
So let's finally go to our helper functions. And let's see if we will have to do any translations here.
So we have here "Posted on " and then the time.
And we also have
"By " and then the author name and we need to translate these.
So for the "Posted on ", this is a situation where we can use printf().
So we need to allow the translator to reorder the "Posted on "
And then something as he likes.
Right?
So let's do here a "printf" and then "esc_html__" and then "Posted on " and
a placeholder.
And then of course the text domain "firsttheme". And then the second argument for the printf() will be the
date inside the A tag, right?
So we'll have to copy the A tag from here.
And then put it as the second argument for the printf(). So let's just add new lines to make this a bit
more legible.
And let's paste the A tag and then the TIME tag
and the closing of the A tag.
I think that should do it.
So let's remove these echoes.
and let's take a look in the browser. So let's go back to the home page and as you can see it's working.
"Posted on "
and then the A tag with the date inside of it.
So let's do exactly the same for the "By "
and then the author.
So "printf" and then "By " and a placeholder and you just have to put the translation function so
"esc_html__"
and then the text domain.
And the second argument for the printf() will be the A tag. The A tag which contains the author name.
So let's copy is from below.
So let's now remove this one and let's see if it's working.
And it's working but we also forgot the space before the "By ".
So let's do it. And there we have it.
So now our post_meta() function is fully translatable.
Let's finally do the, I know this lecture took too long, but let's do the readmore_link() function.
There is something a bit different about it.
So here we have the "Read More".
And then we have some text in a SPAN tag for screen readers
As we discussed in the previous lecture.
So what we can do here is printf() also. And then "esc_html__"
and then "Read More " and then let's copy the SPAN tag.
So "Read More " and then "About " placeholder, right?
And let's close the SPAN tag and let's just copy the text domain and then the second argument for the
printf() will be the the post title.
Right?
So we can use get_the_title().
So this way we will replace the placeholder with the title of the post,
right?
So let's remove this
all the echo here. And let's add a semicolon here.
And I want you to notice something before even trying this on the browser. You are using
esc_html() and we actually have HTML inside of our string, right?
So let's see what will happen now and the HTML will be rendered as text because you are escaping it.
So what we can do about that? Instead of escaping the HTML using esc_html() here we can use another
function. A function that will escape HTML
but also who can pass some tags. So in our case we want to escape all HTML except the SPAN tags.
So it's called a function called wp_kses(). So k, s, e, s.
And the first argument for this function will be the string that we would like to escape.
So it will be the string inside the __() function.
So it takes also a second argument but let's close the wp_kses() function first. And this second argument would
to be an array.
And this array will be the list of tags that we want to allow, right?
So in our case it's a SPAN tag.
And this will be the key of the array and the value will be another array of allowed attributes for
this tag,
right?
So in our case we can allow the "class" attributes. And this also will be the key to the array. And the
value we can make it in an empty array.
And looks like we have some syntax error here.
Yeah we're missing the comma here.
So let's add it.
Great. So let's just quickly recap in case you are confused.
So the printf() function the first argument for it will be the wp_kses() function and the second will
be
get_the title(). The wp_kses() function, the first argument for it will be the string we want to escape.
And the second argument will be an array of tags that we would like to allow.
Right?
So let's take a look now.
And looks like we've done something wrong.
So let's take a look.
And ok, I just forgot the "s" in the placeholder. Let's take a look now.
And it's working fine. And also let's make sure the SPAN tag is displayed.
And here it is.
Let's also try to add a SCRIPT tag here and let's see what will happen.
So now we have a SCRIPT tag that should not be rendered,
right?
So let's have a look.
And as expected the wp_kses() function removed the SCRIPT tag. And our string is now safe, right? Let's
finally add translation messages for the translators.
It's good practice so resume
real quick here.
So here we can say "%s is the Post Dates".
And here we can say it's the "Post Author".
And then finally here we can say the placeholder is the "Post Title", right?
So I think that's it for internationalization and localization. During the course we will use these concepts
a lot.
So by the time I think you'll get more used to them.
So let's move on now to the next section.